
I was reviewing my Pragmatic Programmer notes the other day and I came accross the my notes on the "Evil Wixards" section. 

Tool makers and infrastructure vendors have come up with a magic bullet, the wizard. Wizards are great. Just click a single button, answer a couple of simple questions, and the wizard will automatically generate skeleton code for you.


All the time the applications themselves are getting more complex. Most
developments now use a multitier model, possibly with some middle-
ware layer or a transaction monitor. These programs are expected to be
dynamic and flexible, and to interoperate with applications written by
third parties.

Oh, and did we mention that we needed it all next week?

Developers are struggling to keep up. If we were using the same kind
of tools that produced the basic dumb-terminal applications 20 years
ago, we’d never get anything done.

So the tool makers and infrastructure vendors have come up with a
magic bullet, the wizard. Wizards are great. Do you need an MDI appli-
cation with OLE container support? Just click a single button, answer a
couple of simple questions, and the wizard will automatically generate
skeleton code for you. The Microsoft Visual C++ environment creates
over 1,200 lines of code for this scenario, automatically. Wizards are
hard at work in other contexts, too. You can use wizards to create server
components, implement Java beans, and handle network interfaces—
all complex areas where it’s nice to have expert help.

But using a wizard designed by a guru does not automatically make Joe
developer equally expert. Joe can feel pretty good—he’s just produced
a mass of code and a pretty spiffy-looking program. He just adds in the
specific application functionality and it’s ready to ship. But unless Joe
actually understands the code that has been produced on his behalf,
he’s fooling himself. He’s programming by coincidence. Wizards are a
one-way street—they cut the code for you, and then move on. If the code they produce isn’t quite right, or if circumstances change and you
need to adapt the code, you’re on your own.

